Part I

THE POWER OF FRAMING

Yes, I have tricks in my pocket. I have
things up my sleeve. But I am the
opposite of a stage magician. He gives
you illusion that has the appearance of
truth. I give you truth in the pleasant
disguise of illusion.
TOM WINGFIELD, IN
TENNESSEE WILLIAMS’S THE GL ASS MENAGERIE

THE POWER OF FRAMING
Negotiating in the NFL
’ve got to come up with some new idea. You guys keep
“ Y ou
talking past each other instead of to each other.” These were the exas1

perated words of United States Magistrate Judge Arthur Boylan, who had
been tasked with helping to end an escalating conflict between players
and owners in the National Football League (NFL). It was May 2011,
and team owners had already locked out the players. Much of the action
was taking place in courtrooms, as each side tried to gain leverage through
legal maneuverings. Ultimately, if a deal could not be struck, the coming
season would be in jeopardy. This was not just a theoretical possibility:
in 2005, a prolonged dispute between owners and players had decimated
an entire season in the National Hockey League, eliminating more than
$2 billion in projected revenue. The NFL had even more to lose, with
approximately $10 billion standing in the balance.
With so much money at stake in professional sports, you can be
assured that, once in a while, the action at the bargaining table will rival
anything fans get to witness on the field. At issue in 2011 was the fate
of the new collective bargaining agreement (CBA), a multiyear contract
between owners and the players’ union that governs the negotiation of
individual contracts for all NFL players. The CBA also dictates, among
other things, the revenue distribution between players and owners, the
salary cap, minimum salaries, free agency rules, the terms of the annual
draft, and working conditions. As in most CBA disputes in sports, one
of the most salient and contentious issues in 2011 surrounded revenue
sharing between owners and players. In other words, what percentage of
the game’s revenue should go to players and what percentage to owners?
In this case, the owners were demanding a $2 billion off-the-top credit to

8


Chapter 1: The Power of Framing

9

support investments before any split of revenues would take place, after
which the players would receive approximately 58% of what remained.
Players wanted no off-the-top credit for owners, and a 50–50 split of all
revenues.2
How do you resolve a dispute in which the demands of each party add
up to more than is on the table—and neither side is willing to concede?

NEGOTIATING THE IMPOSSIBLE
The conflict escalated, and good faith bargaining gave way to legal maneuverings, heavy-handed tactics, and even appeals to the US Congress for
intervention. Finally, there was a breakthrough. The resolution came
when the parties agreed to a proposal (originating from the owners) that
called for an entirely novel structure for revenue sharing. They decided
that the way forward was to stop negotiating over “what percentage of all
revenue” goes to each party. Instead, the parties would divide “all revenue” into three separate buckets that represented the different streams of
NFL revenue. Then, they negotiated a different revenue sharing percentage for each bucket. The idea worked. The final agreement, signed August
4, 2011, states that players will receive:
• 55% of League Media revenue (e.g., revenue from
TV rights)
• 45% of NFL Ventures / Postseason revenue (i.e.,
revenues from related businesses of the NFL)
• 40% of Local revenue (e.g., stadium revenue)
The solution, however, begs the question: What percentage of all revenues do the players receive from this deal? Running the numbers indicates that the three-buckets solution gives the players between 47% and
48% of all revenues in the first year of the contract. But wait! If that’s the
case, why go to all the trouble of creating three buckets with different percentages for each? Why not avoid the hassle of creating a new accounting
system and simply agree to the players getting ~47.5% of all revenues?


10

PART I: THE POWER OF FRAMING

There is an economically rational explanation for why three buckets may be a wiser solution than one big bucket. For example, consider
what happens after the first year of the contract. If the players expect that
League Media revenue will grow faster and hence represent a larger share
of all revenues in the future, and the owners project that Local revenue
will grow more rapidly, then the three-buckets approach is a value creating solution: it gives each side a higher percentage of the bucket it values
most. The only problem with this economically rational explanation is
that it has very little to do with why the two sides actually agreed to three
buckets. We can be sure that the economically rational explanation falls
short because when you read further down in the CBA, there is another
provision that contains the following language:
If, in any of the 2012–14 League Years, the Player Cost
Amount . . . is greater than 48% of Projected “All Revenue” then
the Player Cost Amount will be reduced to 48% of Projected
“All Revenue.” . . . If, in any of these League Years, the Player
Cost Amount is less than 47% of Projected “All Revenue”, the
Player Cost Amount shall be increased to 47% of Projected
“All Revenue.”

In other words, the two sides are agreeing to roughly 47.5% of all revenues going to players. If the percentage deviates in any meaningful way from
47.5% in any direction, it will be brought back to this relatively tight range.3
So we still have the same question: why go to the trouble of creating
three buckets if the agreement is practically indistinguishable from what
they could have achieved by agreeing to some specified percentage of all
revenues for each year of the contract? To answer this, we need to first
keep in mind that very few people actually look carefully at these kinds
of contracts, and almost no media outlets comprehensively report or
analyze the finer details of the deal. Second, while practically inconsequential, there is a small degree of movement possible in the revenue split
in future years. Most importantly, the three-buckets approach is superior
to the one-bucket approach in one essential respect: it allows each side
to go back to its constituents and declare victory. It creates just enough
room for league negotiators to report to the owners that they can keep a
higher percentage of revenues where owner investments are greater (i.e.,


Chapter 1: The Power of Framing

11

stadium-related revenues), and it lets Players Association negotiators
announce that they get more than 50% of revenues whenever fans click
on the television.
CONTROL THE FRAME
As the NFL example illustrates, even in difficult negotiations where the
parties are deadlocked, stalemate might be overcome without the use
of money or muscle.4 Even though the argument was over money, the
league did not have to keep throwing more dollars on the table to get the
players to agree to the deal. Instead, what they did is a great illustration of
the power of framing: objectively identical proposals can be made more
or less attractive simply by how they are presented.
The “frame” of the negotiation is a psychological lens. It is a sense-making
apparatus that influences how people perceive each other, the issues at
hand, and the options that exist. There is almost no limit to the number
and types of frames that can emerge in a negotiation. For example, negotiators may look at a deal through a financial or a strategic lens, see it from
a short-term or a long-term perspective, or regard it as a friendly or hostile
engagement. Likewise, diplomats may look at a problem from a political
or a security point of view, as being a central or a peripheral concern, or
in a historic or present-day context. Deal makers may evaluate a proposal
relative to their initial aspirations for the deal, or how well it compares to
what others have achieved, or how it will be judged by others.
There are no “right” or “wrong” frames, but which frame takes hold
has important implications for how the parties behave and what they
will ultimately be willing to accept. For example, sometimes a low-stakes
issue that neither side really cares much about becomes infused with so
much political or symbolic significance that neither side is willing or able
to back down. In recent years, Democrats and Republicans in the United
States Congress have been confronting this problem extensively: compromise on the slightest issue is considered by many partisans to be akin
to wholesale betrayal, making it harder to reach agreements even where
there is a lot at stake and plenty of bipartisan support on the substance of
an issue.


12

PART I: THE POWER OF FRAMING

Importantly, negotiators almost always have the power to influence the
frame, and as we will see, reframing can be a powerful tool for overcoming
barriers to deal making. Regardless of the objective stakes, much of what
determines how people approach a problem depends on how they (or
their constituents) subjectively make sense of it. Deal makers are unwilling
to make concessions to perceived adversaries but are more amenable to
doing so when they perceive the task as a collaborative problem-solving
effort. Negotiators who frame a conflict as “winner takes all” will have a
harder time than negotiators who believe it is possible for everyone to
“win.” Negotiators will be more or less willing to accept certain proposals
when they adopt a short-term versus a long-term lens, or when the offer
appears better versus worse than what they initially expected. As we discuss the power of framing throughout this section, we will pay particular
attention to how objectively identical proposals and options can be reframed
to make them more attractive to the other side. Paying attention not just to
the substance of what is being negotiated, but also the lens through which
parties are evaluating their options, can sometimes help break seemingly
impossible deadlocks.
Control the frame of the negotiation. The frame that
takes hold will shape how negotiators make decisions,
evaluate options, and decide what is acceptable.

THE IMPORTANCE OF HELPING THE OTHER SIDE BACK DOWN
The problems that negotiators face in early stages of deal making can be
quite different from the problems they face as talks progress. One critical
difference relates to the reasons why someone stubbornly insists on making demands that you cannot possibly meet. When this happens early in
a negotiation, it is usually a sign that you have failed to set appropriate
expectations for what is possible. This can lead the other side to ask for
the impossible—that is, to demand concessions that are true deal breakers for you. This is why it is a good idea to educate the other side at the
outset about the limits of what you can offer and about the areas where


Chapter 1: The Power of Framing

13

you have more or less flexibility. Negotiators often fail to do this in the
false belief that the other side is well-enough informed about the parameters of the negotiation, or because they are worried that discussing any
limitations or constraints will raise doubts about their value as a partner.
There may also be insufficient trust, making it harder for either side to
believe that the other is genuinely so constrained, or that there is truly so
little room for movement.
When people are initially deadlocked over incompatible positions, it
usually means that their aspirations are unrealistic and there is simply not
enough value on the table to meet them. If both sides want more than
50% of the pot, you have a serious problem, and the sooner you realize
that it has nothing do with poor math skills, the better off you will be.
This was undoubtedly the case in the NFL. The same problem frequently
surfaces in diplomatic negotiations and business disputes.
But at some point in the process, perhaps after weeks of interaction,
or months of trust building, or years of impasse, one or both parties may
come to the conclusion that their earlier demands are not possible, and
that major concessions will be needed to avoid a truly disastrous outcome.
When that day comes, you may find that people are still unwilling to lower
their demands. Now, you no longer have an education or trust problem to
solve. The problem is how to get the other side to admit that they initially
asked for more than was reasonable, and to back down and accept what
is actually possible. The problem is all the worse when the other side will
have to back down publicly, because they have committed to aggressive
positions in front of others (e.g., their constituents or the media). In my
experience, it is often relatively easier to get people to understand that
they have overreached and that their demands are impossible to meet; it
is a lot harder to get them to acknowledge this and change course. This
was the problem that the NFL negotiators faced—and ultimately solved.
Convincing the other party that they will have to concede
or withdraw from initial positions is not enough. You
have to make it easier for them to back down.


14

PART I: THE POWER OF FRAMING

NEGOTIATE STYLE AND STRUCTURE, NOT JUST THE SUBSTANCE
When the NFL negotiations were deadlocked, either side could have
tried to make the deal more attractive to the other by reducing their own
revenue demands. But this would have been a costly concession. As the
solution they reached shows, you do not always have to throw money at
the problem to move things along. Sometimes, wise concessions on style
and structure can solve the problem more cheaply than costly concessions on substance. In this case, the three-buckets solution seems to have
helped the parties accept a deal that did not seem palatable with a onebucket structure, even though the objective value of the deal was almost
identical. Negotiators who are mindful of style and structure are better
positioned to overcome resistance, avoid impasse, and achieve better
outcomes.
Wise concessions on style and structure can help
solve a problem more cheaply than costly concessions
on substance.
In the next chapter, we take a closer look at the various ways in which
framing can help break deadlock without using money or muscle. In
doing so, we derive more principles for resolving conflict of all kinds. We
also devote particular attention to two factors that were at play in the NFL
negotiations and that can make deadlocks especially difficult to break.
First, there is the audience problem. The other side may be concerned not
just with what they get from you, but also with how others will judge
their acceptance of your offer. Second, there is the zero-sum problem. In
a zero-sum situation the amount that one side gains must precisely equal
what the other side loses.5 When people are stuck negotiating over only
one divisive issue, and there are no other interests involved, it becomes
hard for them to make concessions without feeling they have lost and the
other side has won. Let’s see how these issues might be tackled.


2

LEVERAGING THE POWER OF FRAMING
Stalemate over Royalty Rates

W

e were negotiating a large commercial agreement.1 The company I was advising was an early-stage venture that had developed a
potentially game-changing product in a multibillion-dollar industry. The
folks on the other side of the table were hoping to license our product and
help bring it to market. As a result, we had to negotiate a wide range of
issues: licensing fee, royalty rate, exclusivity provisions, milestones, development commitments, and so on. We got stuck on royalty rate—that is,
the percentage of sale price they would pay us for each product they sold.
There had been some early discussions in which the two sides had
very informally agreed that a 5% royalty rate was reasonable. As time
went on, it seemed that we had slightly different interpretations regarding
how this percentage would be applied. Our view was that 5% was low, but
would be acceptable as the rate they paid to us initially. As the product
gained traction and was validated by the market, we felt the royalty rate
should increase to a more appropriate, higher level. We understood that
our technology was still in a development phase, that early sales momentum might be slow, and that their heavy investments in manufacturing
warranted a concession from our side.
Their perspective was quite different. They argued that because of their
investments, the royalty rate should initially be close to zero; after two to
three years, the 5% rate would kick in; and after that, royalty rates should
go down, not up. Why should they go down, we asked? “Because in our
industry, we always see royalty rates go down over time, not up. That’s
just how it is,” they replied. After some further probing they provided

15


16

PART I: THE POWER OF FRAMING

additional rationale: “If we are selling more of your product over time,
you should be willing to accept a lower percentage.”
Our initial hope was that we would be able to avoid confronting this
issue head-on because the value of the overall deal was quite high, and
with so much money to be made, this should not be a deal breaker for
them. As the days passed with little progress, we realized that they really
were stuck on the idea that “royalty rates are supposed to go down.” Were
they worried about the precedent this might set in their other deals? Was
it something they had promised their board, and now they did not want
to lose face? Were they simply trying to get better financial terms? Try as
we might, we could not get the numbers to work with rates going down
over time. And if we tried to accommodate their desire for lower rates in
the first year or two, it further increased our need for higher rates later.
What to do?

WITHOUT MONEY OR MUSCLE
There are times when two sides have incompatible positions and one has
to yield. There are other times when each side compromises, meeting in
the middle (for example, we could have agreed to a flat royalty rate over
time). And then there are times when the laws of physics do not necessarily apply to negotiations: things can go up and down at the same time.
The breakthrough came when we noticed a flaw in how we were
going about the discussion: we were stuck negotiating royalty rates in
one dimension (over time), when our differing perspectives made clear
that two dimensions were in play: the passage of time and the quantity of
sales. Maybe we could leverage this to create a royalty schedule that went
both up and down. If the other side needed to show rates going down
over time, perhaps we could accommodate this and still safeguard our
financial interests when the product sold more. With this in mind, we
sent them a royalty table that no longer listed rates over time. Instead,


Chapter 2: Leveraging the Power of Framing

17

we created a two-dimensional chart that listed rates as a function of time
and quantity sold. It looked something like Table 1.2
TABLE 1

Quantity
Sold

Year
1

Year
2

Year
3

Year
4

Year
5

...

Year
10

200,000

9.5%

9.0%

8.5%

8.0%

7.5%

...

7.0%

180,000

8

8

7

7

0

0

160,000

7

7

6

6

5

5

140,000

6

6

5

5

4

4

120,000

5

5

4

4

3

3

100,000

4

4

3

3

2

2

80,000

3

3

2

2

1

1

60,000

2

2

1

1

1

1

40,000

1

1

1

1

1

1

20,000

1

1

1

1

1

1

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

For each year, instead of one royalty rate we would have a range (with
a minimum and maximum) based on quantity sold. Notably, the maximum royalty rate for each year would decrease over time (top row), which
we hoped would meet their demand for diminishing royalty rates. At the
same time, the actual royalty rate for each year could increase year after
year if we sold more. Our expectations for how the royalty rates would
actually materialize is shown in Table 2, with highlighted cells showing
our internal projections.


18

PART I: THE POWER OF FRAMING

TABLE 2

Quantity
Sold

Year
1

Year
2

Year
3

Year
4

Year
5

...

Year
10

200,000

9.5%

9.0%

8.5%

8.0%

7.5%

...

7.0%

180,000

8

8

7

7

6

6

160,000

7

7

6

6

5

5

140,000

6

6

5

5

4

4

120,000

5

5

4

4

3

3

100,000

4

4

3

3

2

2

80,000

3

3

2

2

1

1

60,000

2

2

1

1

1

1

40,000

1

1

1

1

1

1

20,000

1

1

1

1

1

1

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

It worked. The other side argued over some of the numbers in the
table, but this new proposal helped reframe our dialogue and avoid
impasse. The two sides were no longer arguing over royalty trajectory
or the rationale for whether it should go up or down, and in the weeks
ahead, the issue went away completely. The final agreement contained a
simplified version of the royalty table (with fewer columns and rows) that
accounted for time and quantity. While perhaps not substantively different
from what could have been accomplished by agreeing to royalty rates on
one dimension, this stylistic approach helped our negotiating partner feel
more comfortable with how the deal looked, and let us feel comfortable
with the financial outcome.
PAY ATTENTION TO THE OPTICS OF THE DEAL
As this example illustrates, it’s not just what you propose, but how you propose it. Too often, negotiators incorrectly assume that if you get the substance of the deal right—that is, your proposal is sufficiently valuable to the


Chapter 2: Leveraging the Power of Framing

19

other side—then you do not have to worry about “how it looks,” what we
call the optics of the deal. But here, as in the NFL negotiations, the problem
was not the value on the table, but the way the proposal was framed.
The role of optics is especially pronounced when there is an audience.
The audience can be voters, the media, competitors, future negotiation
partners, a boss, colleagues, or even friends and family. We are usually
aware of our own audience, but we pay insufficient attention to theirs. In
fact, their audience is just as important to consider as ours, especially if
we are asking them to back down or make hefty concessions. To think of
their audience as “their problem” ignores a central tenet of most difficult
negotiations: there is no such thing as their problem; what seems to be
their problem, if left unsolved, eventually becomes your problem. You
may have already given them an offer that is superior to their alternatives,
one that they “should” accept, but if you have not paid sufficient attention
to the other factors that influence their decisions, you may find that even
your generous offers are being rejected.
Pay attention to the optics of the deal. It’s not just the
substance of what you offer that matters, but how it
looks to your negotiating partners and to their audience.

HELP THE OTHER SIDE SELL IT
In the 1991 book Getting Past No, William Ury uses a cogent phrase to
highlight the importance of helping the other side with its audience. Ury
tells us to “write their victory speech” for them. I always ask my students
and clients to carefully consider not just how much value they are providing to the other side, but also how they and their audience will view
an offer. Think about how they can possibly say yes to what you are proposing
and still declare victory. If you cannot think of a way that they can construe
the agreement as a “win,” you may be in trouble.
This does not mean you should use stylistic or structural maneuvers
to sell deals that are not in the best interest of either side’s constituents.
Later in this section we will tackle the possibility and problems of doing


20

PART I: THE POWER OF FRAMING

so, but for now, let us appreciate how everyone can benefit from effective
framing. In the NFL example, reframing the proposal using three buckets
helped create a narrative that the parties could use when they went home
with what quite likely was the best deal they were going to get. Reframing
helped avoid an impasse that could have resulted from negotiators being
too concerned about their own image rather than what was best for their
constituents. In our negotiations over royalty rates we were able to come
up with a substantive proposal that worked for the other side, but they
still needed help in framing the proposal so that nonsubstantive concerns
would not derail it.
The same principle applies in less complex environments—for example, when you are negotiating a job offer. If the hiring manager is going to
sweeten the deal or make an exception for you, he or she will need some
way to justify it internally. I always remind my MBA students to help the
other side with the arguments and narrative they need to explain why the
concession they made was appropriate and necessary in this case.
Think about how the other side will sell the deal, and
frame the proposal with their audience in mind.

MAKE IT SAFE FOR THE OTHER SIDE TO ASK FOR HELP
It is not always obvious whether the other side truly needs a substantive
concession or merely has a problem with how your offer will look to their
audiences. As you might also suspect, the other side is often unwilling to
clarify which of these is the case. For them to admit that they don’t absolutely need a substantive concession would be costly if we were already
prepared to make one. Telling us that our proposal is, in fact, sufficiently
valuable also undermines their argument for making further demands.
Finally, revealing that they need help selling the deal could make them
look weak, and may disrupt the deal process. These are all understandable
concerns that might cause someone who is struggling with the optics to
act as if the deal is simply not good enough.
If there is sufficient trust in the relationship, the other side is more
likely to be candid about what is really standing in the way of the deal.


Chapter 2: Leveraging the Power of Framing

21

Even when there is little trust, a healthy degree of professional respect
between the negotiators can help them signal to each other if they are
stuck on the optics. Such signaling usually happens with a degree of
plausible deniability; their signals will be ambiguous enough so that, if
pushed, they can deny having such needs, but you know and they know
that a message was sent.
It is important to remember that even these signals are hard to come
by if you are seen as someone who always takes advantage of the slightest
sign of weakness from the other side. To put it simply: The safer you make
it for the other party to tell you the truth, the more likely they are to do so.3
The best way to make it safe is to show them, through your actions, that
you do not exploit every advantage you see, and that you appreciate the
risks they are taking in being honest or transparent on important issues.
In my experience, repeated negotiations or multiple deals over many
months or years are not required for such reputations to be built; reputations for integrity and reliability are usually built in countless small ways
throughout the process of even one deal. For example, you build trust by
reciprocating when others have shared sensitive information or made a
concession, by following through on your commitments, and by showing
a willingness to be flexible when possible rather than fighting tooth and
nail on every point.
Make it safe for the other side to ask for help on optics.
Build a reputation for rewarding transparency and not
exploiting their moments of weakness.

AVOID ONE-ISSUE NEGOTIATIONS
The royalty rate negotiation highlights a common problem in negotiations: getting stuck on one divisive issue. Counterintuitive as it may seem,
negotiations are often easier when you have more than one thing to fight
about. When there is only one issue on the table, and it is not easy to see
how both sides can get what they want—or as much as they have promised to their audiences—you have a zero-sum problem in which at least


22

PART I: THE POWER OF FRAMING

one of you is going to feel or look like you lost. In these situations, it is
useful to consider whether you can bring other issues to the table so that
each side can walk away with something. When one of my children wants
a toy that a sibling is playing with, I often advise him or her to bring along
another toy to facilitate a potential trade. Arguing over who will get the
one and only toy is not as likely to end well.
Alternatively, you might consider linking or combining what otherwise would have been two separate one-issue negotiations to create one
easier negotiation rather than two more difficult ones. It is easier for my
kids to agree on which TV show they will watch on Friday and Saturday if
they discuss both days at the same time rather than having a separate conversation each day. What would be two separate arguments is replaced
with one discussion in which each person gets something of value.
Sometimes, introducing even a relatively minor second issue is
enough to dislodge the stalemate. The “win” you help to create for the
other side need not always be as substantively valuable as what they give
to you on the divisive issue. As noted, they may already be willing to live
with you having your way on the divisive issue and are only looking for
something—anything—around which to create a narrative that says
“Both sides made concessions.”
Avoid negotiating over a single divisive issue. Add issues
or link separate one-issue negotiations.

NEGOTIATE MULTIPLE ISSUES SIMULTANEOUSLY
Even if there are multiple issues in the negotiation, if I have to concede on
the issue we are discussing now in the hope that you will concede on the
issue to be discussed later, I may be unwilling to take that risk. To address
such concerns, it is usually wise to negotiate multiple issues simultaneously.
In other words, instead of trying to reach agreement one issue at a time,
create the habit of making “package” offers and counteroffers. For example, “Here is what we can do on Issue A, here is where we need to be on
Issue B, and here is what we can accommodate on Issue C.” This serves


Chapter 2: Leveraging the Power of Framing

23

two purposes. First, as mentioned, it eliminates the risk that a concession
made now will not be reciprocated later—you can make your concession
contingent on theirs. Second, with multiple issues in the mix during the
same discussion, it becomes easier for negotiators to make wise trades
across issues—you can fight for what you care about more in exchange
for giving up what the other side values more. In contrast, when you
negotiate one issue at a time, people will often fight equally hard for whatever happens to be on the table at that time, making it difficult to find out
what each side really cares about most.
For example, if I’m negotiating a complex business deal and someone
tries to negotiate on one issue in isolation (e.g., price), I will usually shift
the conversation to include other issues. There are many ways to do this.
I can simply say that my position on price depends on where we are on
other terms, so we need to discuss those issues as well before we try to
finalize the price. I can make a “package” offer that includes terms other
than price and clarify that my stated price assumes the following terms.
I can present multiple offers, each with a different price and different
terms, so the other side can better understand how the issues are related
and how much flexibility I have. Any of these tactics can help us avoid
getting bogged down on one divisive issue.
Negotiate multiple issues simultaneously to help
identify wise trades and to reduce the risk that
concessions will not be reciprocated.

DIFFUSE THE SPOTLIGHT
With multiple issues on the table, it is easier to construct an agreement
that allows each side to show some wins. Unfortunately, even with multiple issues, one issue sometimes becomes the most prominent, and
everyone starts using it as the sole measure of who wins and who loses.
This was precisely the problem in the NFL negotiations; even if one
side received monumental concessions on other issues, most observers
would still use the revenue-split issue as the only barometer of success.


24

PART I: THE POWER OF FRAMING

We also see this when political parties are negotiating over legislation.
The reason it happens can vary. Sometimes the media or other audiences
have limited information or expertise to judge anything other than one
prominent issue. Other times, regrettably, the negotiators themselves
inflate the importance of a single issue in their rhetoric. Politicians might
do this to drum up enthusiasm among supporters, or deal makers may
inadvertently do so as they try to efficiently articulate their positions. In
some cases the problem arises even when there is no audience; one issue
becomes prominent because one or both sides have overstated its importance to justify an aggressive opening position.
Don’t let any single issue become too prominent. Educate
your audiences about how to measure success, and limit
the amount of attention given to any one issue.

SPLIT ONE ISSUE INTO TWO
Of course, there are situations where one issue is objectively the most
important. And there are situations where, try as you may, no other issues
are relevant (or possible to include) in the discussion. Even in these cases
there is another strategy for avoiding a win/lose outcome: split the one
issue into two or more. This is what the NFL negotiators did by splitting
one revenue number into three separate revenue “buckets.” We did something similar in the commercial agreement discussion: splitting “royalty
rate per year” into “royalty scale per year” and “royalty based on quantity.”
And going back to the example of children and their toys: if there is only
one toy, you might “split one issue into two” by discussing who gets the
toy now and who gets it later. (Note: it is usually not as effective to actually break the toy into two pieces, although there are exceptions to this.)
If there is only one issue, try to split it into two or more
separate issues.


Chapter 2: Leveraging the Power of Framing

25

UNMASK THE UNDERLYING INTERESTS
What seems like one contentious issue is sometimes composed of multiple hidden interests that are reconcilable. In such situations, you may be
able to overcome stalemate by unmasking the underlying interests. For
example, consider an employee who is haggling over an increase in salary
with an employer who is clearly unwilling to agree to the raise. The reason
may be that the employer does not think the employee deserves such a
large increase in pay. If so, one option would be for the two of them to
“meet in the middle” and find an amount they can both live with. If they
can’t find such a number, they may have to go their separate ways. But
what if the employer thinks the employee’s demand is fair, and the only
reason she is saying no to the initial ask is that her budget is limited for
this year? In that case, instead of meeting in the middle, it may be wise to
split the issue into “salary this year” and “salary next year.” This way, the
employer can delay a hit to the budget, and the employee gets a much
higher salary starting the following year.
In other words, it may be possible for both sides to meet their underlying interests (getting a higher raise, staying within budget), but this
will only happen if they stop arguing about “what they want,” and start
discussing their motivations for “why they want it.” This is referred to as
shifting from positions (what people want) to interests (why they want
it). Even when you have opposing positions on an issue, you might have
compatible interests. The sooner you shift from arguing over positions
to exploring underlying interests, the more quickly you will ascertain
whether the needs of both sides can be reconciled.
Incompatible positions might be hiding reconcilable
underlying interests. Understanding why the other
side wants something can lead to better outcomes than
continuing to argue over competing demands or trying
to meet in the middle.


26

PART I: THE POWER OF FRAMING

FIRM ON SUBSTANCE, FLEXIBLE ON STRUCTURE
Effective negotiators are assertive where needed and flexible when possible. After you have evaluated what each side brings to the table, and after
you have considered what would be fair to demand, be as firm as necessary
on what you deserve. But your assertiveness on substance should not spill
over into stubbornness regarding how your demands are met. As the NFL
and royalty rate examples demonstrate, the less demanding you are on the
precise structure of the agreement, the more likely you are to find a deal
that works for everyone. This flexibility gives the other side more options
and makes it more likely that they can find some way to meet your needs. In
my experience, a useful message to send to the other party, in both words
and deeds throughout the negotiation, is this: I know where I need to get;
I’m flexible on how we get there. To put it another way: the more currencies
you allow them to pay you in, the more likely you are to get paid.
Be as firm as needed on substance; be as flexible as
possible on style and structure.

GETTING UNSTUCK IS A WORTHY ENOUGH SHORT-TERM GOAL
You may have noticed that our offer to negotiate royalty rates in two
dimensions instead of one did not immediately solve the problem.
Instead, the other side pushed back on elements of the structure and
found faults with this proposal, not the least of which was the fact that the
numbers were too high for them. But what the proposal did accomplish
was getting us unstuck on the divisive issue. We were now discussing matters that were substantive and ultimately reconcilable. This is an important point: crafting proposals that are sensitive to the other side’s audience
needs and which help to maneuver around divisive issues will not necessarily resolve the entire conflict or seal the entire deal. These proposals
will, however, reduce the amount of time spent in deadlock and make it
more likely that a mutually acceptable agreement can be found.


Chapter 2: Leveraging the Power of Framing

27

A wisely framed proposal need not resolve the entire
dispute. Sometimes just getting unstuck is the key to
paving the path towards eventual agreement.
In the examples considered so far, deadlock was caused by the two
sides having opposing objectives, which led them to make demands that
seemed irreconcilable. But it is possible to have deadlock even when the
interests of everyone in the room are aligned and everyone is working
towards the same objective. People might still disagree about the best way
to achieve that objective. This might happen because there is insufficient
trust, or because people are not effectively articulating the merits of their
proposals, or because everyone has strong, and different, prior beliefs
about the right path to take. We will see a number of these factors at play
in the next chapter, in a domain of human interaction that is quite different from the situations we have considered so far. Let’s see how framing
tactics can help overcome psychological resistance to ideas that are new,
foreign, or different from a person’s existing beliefs or expectations.


3

THE LOGIC OF APPROPRIATENESS
Negotiating in the Shadow of Cancer

Y

ou may have the best, most innovative proposal, but how do you
present it to someone who insists on doing things the way they’ve
always been done? You may have the person’s best interest in mind, but
how can you negotiate in the face of severe resistance to change? You may
be right, but how do you make your case when the other side is emotionally attached to an alternative course of action?
Consider the case of patients who are diagnosed with low-risk prostate cancer.1 Most prostate cancer cases in the United States are detected
using a screening test called the prostate-specific antigen test (PSA).2
There is considerable evidence that many PSA-detected cancers are
overdiagnosed—that is, the patient would have lived out the natural
course of his life without ever knowing he had prostate cancer if not for
having taken the PSA test.3 At Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center
(MSKCC) in New York, one of the preeminent institutions in cancer
research and treatment, “active surveillance” is generally recommended
for men with low-risk prostate cancer—and is preferred over treatments
such as surgery and radiotherapy that can cause side effects, including
incontinence and erectile dysfunction. This recommendation is consistent with the National Comprehensive Cancer Network guidelines and
the American Urology Association guidelines.
In active surveillance (AS), patients are carefully monitored with
PSA tests, repeat biopsies, and physical examinations; if there is a sign
that the disease has progressed to a higher risk category, patients are
recommended for treatment (e.g., surgery or radiation therapy). An AS
program typically includes lab tests and exams every six months, and a
repeat biopsy every two years, to detect any disease progression.
28


Chapter 3: The Logic of Appropriateness

29

When Dr. Behfar Ehdaie, MD, MPH, began practicing surgery at
MSKCC, he found that only about 60% of the patients for whom he
had recommended AS complied; all others opted for surgery or radiation and were unwilling to accept active surveillance as recommended.
Other doctors at MSKCC had similar rates of compliance when they recommended AS. Moreover—and understandably—even the discussions
a doctor would have with patients who agreed to AS were lengthy and
difficult. Why were so many patients unwilling to accept an expert’s recommendation, even though the doctor would arguably have made more
money by proposing surgery, and even though surgery and radiation have
significant quality-of-life detriments? What could be done differently to
achieve better patient outcomes?

WITHOUT MONEY OR MUSCLE
Dr. Ehdaie and his collaborator, Dr. Andrew Vickers, started experimenting with ways to improve how AS is discussed with patients. When Dr.
Ehdaie reached out to me, he wanted to work together on refining his
approach to discussing AS, and more generally, on helping other doctors
improve their communication with patients. Note that his goal was not to
get other doctors to prescribe AS or any other remedy—that is a choice
for each doctor to make—but to help physicians be more effective in
making whatever recommendation they considered appropriate.4
The core problem, it seemed, was that patients were being asked
to consider an option that was different from what they had initially
assumed they would or should choose. How to overcome this resistance?
How could we help patients more carefully consider doing what is in
their own best interest? Building on ideas Dr. Ehdaie had already started
to implement, we worked together to refine the approach based on existing research in psychology and on my experience helping organizations
articulate their value proposition to customers and stakeholders. The
results have been quite striking. Since changing the conversation in the
room, according to data collected over three months, adoption of AS by
Dr. Ehdaie’s patients has increased from about 60% to 95%. And what
did it cost him to implement the change? Less than nothing. First, the new


30

PART I: THE POWER OF FRAMING

approach did not require any costly changes to policy, administrative
structure, or interactions between doctors, hospitals, and insurance companies. In addition, his average counseling time for low-risk patients actually decreased to around 35 minutes compared to over 60 minutes prior to
implementing the new approach. The conversations were not only more
effective, but also more efficient.
Here I share some of the principles that Dr. Ehdaie now applies in
his communication with patients to keep the conversation from getting
derailed.5 In particular, I focus on how the options are reframed to overcome resistance to change. When blended together, these principles are
like a “recipe” for dealing with resistance to ideas, not just in this setting,
but in all kinds of negotiations.
THE LOGIC OF APPROPRIATENESS
How do people make decisions? How do they decide whether to say “Yes”
or “No,” to choose “A” or “B,” or to act rather than do nothing? We are all
familiar with one way people choose: cost-benefit analysis. The basic idea
is that people weigh the costs and benefits of all options and pick the one
that seems to be best overall, perhaps with some adjustment based on risk
preferences. But is that really how people behave all, or even most, of the
time? Social scientists James March and Johan Olsen have an alternative
model for decision making, which they refer to as the logic of appropriateness.6 They suggest that, rather than engaging in a potentially complex
or time-consuming cost-benefit analysis, people often make decisions by
asking themselves a simple question: “What does a person like me do in a
situation like this?”7 Whatever answer comes to mind when this question
is posed has a significant influence on how people choose to behave.
If we take the logic of appropriateness seriously, it means that we should
be mindful of whether people will perceive our offer or preferred option
as “appropriate,” and also of how we might boost the appropriateness of
the proposals we make. A large body of work in psychology (and more
recently, in behavioral economics) looks at the topic of persuasion
and how choices can be framed to make them more compelling. In my
work with Dr. Ehdaie, we introduced three of these ideas to boost the


Chapter 3: The Logic of Appropriateness

31

appropriateness of AS. I’ve added a fourth here that is not as directly
relevant to negotiation with patients but is very important across many
negotiation contexts. These principles, based on my experience, are
among the most powerful and broadly applicable means of boosting the
appropriateness—and hence the attractiveness—of an idea or proposal.8
The logic of appropriateness tells us that many of the
choices people make are based on how they answer one
simple question: What does a person like me do in a
situation like this?

1: LEVERAGE SOCIAL PROOF
The principle of “social proof,” as articulated by social psychologist
Robert Cialdini, says that when people are unsure about which way to go,
or what to choose, they look to the behavior of others, actual or implied.9
According to the logic of appropriateness, if we think most others are
actually doing something, it must be appropriate. This is because when
people look at the world, they think the world is supposed to make sense.
And so when they see other people choosing a certain course of action,
they say to themselves, “There must be a reason,” and take it as a signal
that it is the correct or normal or acceptable behavior. Not surprisingly,
then, the most direct way to boost the appropriateness of an option is
to demonstrate or signal that others are also choosing it. Dr. Ehdaie
describes how, prior to revising his approach, the principle of social proof
was actually working against him. His earlier efforts to highlight what
makes MSKCC unique were turning patients off to the idea of AS. He
changed his language to take the power of social proof into account:
Before, I would tell patients something like “most men in
the United States do not choose active surveillance because
they are worried that cancer would spread or physicians feel
uncomfortable not recommending surgery or radiation.
However, at MSKCC, we are committed to maintaining your
quality of life and treating your cancer; therefore we recommend surgery or radiation only to men who we know will


32

PART I: THE POWER OF FRAMING

benefit.” Unfortunately, all they heard was “most men do not
choose active surveillance,” and they stopped paying attention
after that. Given the success I have had with my new approach,
I am now able to articulate a very compelling argument. I
emphasize that the vast majority of men like them choose
active surveillance in my clinic and that I follow more than
300 men per year.10

Leverage social proof to boost the appropriateness of
your proposal.

The promise and peril of uniqueness
In business negotiations, the same principle is prevalent. For example,
most people know that “being innovative” can be a source of attraction
and leverage. But as the patients’ example shows, in our rush to portray
our solution as unique, path-breaking, and better than the competition,
we sometimes inadvertently shoot ourselves in the foot. A salesperson,
for example, who is trying to convince the customer that she will have
the advantage of being among the first adopters of a new technology or
solution may find that the strength of this pitch is eroded (or wiped out
completely) by the fact that the other side is implicitly hearing “Other
people like me don’t do this,” and thinking “What do they know that I
don’t?” or “There must be no urgency to do this.” A salesperson in this
situation may need to counterbalance the “uniqueness” argument with
other information that can allay such concerns.
Framing an option as unique might make it more
intriguing but less attractive.

2: SET THE DEFAULT OPTION
Default options are another marker of appropriateness. When something
is the presumptive or preset choice in a setting, it leads people to conclude “It must be the default for a reason”— that is, it must be what most


Chapter 3: The Logic of Appropriateness

33

others do, or it is normal or acceptable. Research has shown that people
are strongly influenced by default options. Even when they are completely
free to choose whatever they want, it seems that shifting away from the
default (i.e., the status quo) is psychologically taxing. Whether people
are choosing between different strategies or different product offerings,
you can boost an option’s appropriateness by making it the default. To
be precise, the principle does not say that the default option is always
the most attractive option, but that an option’s attractiveness is enhanced
when it becomes the default. With prostate cancer, for example, when the
patient enters the room, surgery is often the default option in his mind.
The conversation will be much easier if you can shift the default to AS at
the very beginning of the conversation. To allow surgery to persist as the
default and to later try and muster reasons for moving away from it may
be an uphill battle. Here is how Dr. Ehdaie describes his implementation
of this principle:
When it comes to discussing options, I now introduce
active surveillance as the default choice and focus on it first.
Specifically, I reassure patients that they have low-risk prostate
cancer as compared to other men with high risk disease and
say, “In men like you with low-risk prostate cancer, we recommend active surveillance, and for other men with higher-risk
prostate cancer, we recommend surgery or radiation. Today,
I want to focus on active surveillance, but I can also answer
questions about surgery or radiation. 11

Present your proposal as the default option to boost its
appropriateness.

Start with your draft of the agreement or process
When you are negotiating a contract, who sets the default? Where does
it reside? Usually, it is in the hands of whichever party drafts the initial
version of the contract or whichever party’s boilerplate (i.e., standard contract) you are using. There is a clear advantage to being the party who
presents the initial draft or whose standard contract will be used as the


34

PART I: THE POWER OF FRAMING

template for the deal. In my experience, many items that reside in boilerplates—even some important provisions that have a substantive impact
on the value of the deal—often go unchallenged or, because they are
included in the standard contract, are not haggled over as aggressively
as they would be had they only been proposed orally by the other side.
There is a natural tendency to think, “If it is in their boilerplate, it must
be there for a reason. Perhaps this is normal. This is probably something
most people are willing to accept.”
Relatedly, in the academic literature on negotiation, among the most
widely studied tactics is what is known as “anchoring,” which typically
refers to the idea that the first offer from either side will powerfully frame
the negotiation and shape the other side’s perception about what is possible and acceptable in the deal. As a result, the final outcomes of a negotiation (e.g., the price of an asset) are often correlated with first offers.12
Default proposals or expectations are also relevant to how a negotiation process should be structured—for example, timetables for completing
the deal, who will be involved in the negotiation, which side will make
the opening offer, what will be on the agenda, and so on. In most cases,
there are preexisting expectations or standards for such choices based on
precedent. It behooves negotiators to evaluate existing defaults, and to try
to shift them if necessary. As with other factors that influence framing,
the longer a default persists, the harder it is to change. If you can shift the
default before the other party enters the room, all the better. If you cannot,
move quickly to shift perceptions regarding the default at the outset of
negotiations. For this reason, Dr. Ehdaie now tries to shift the default from
“surgery” to “active surveillance” as early as possible in the conversation.
The party that drafts the initial version of the
agreement or process gains leverage.

3: SHIFT THE REFERENCE POINT
Is $10,000 a lot of money? It can be a hard question to answer definitively
because it depends on what you are comparing it to or contemplating. If
you are thinking about buying a watch, it is a lot of money and the amount


Chapter 3: The Logic of Appropriateness

35

will be very salient; if you’re buying a house or discussing the national
debt, then it is not particularly attention worthy. The point is that people
do not react to or evaluate data and options in a vacuum. Someone who
is evaluating an offer, the suitability of a timetable, or the level of success
achieved on a performance metric always has some reference point in
mind. If it is the “wrong” reference point, even the best data or the most
meritorious argument will be evaluated as weak. Before presenting your
information, then, it is wise to set an appropriate reference point. As Dr.
Ehdaie explains:
In the past, when I would explain that active surveillance
entails six-month follow-ups, the patients and their families
would immediately get alarmed that this did not seem like
“close” monitoring and that the cancer might spread in the six
months between appointments. The discussion would shift to
a very defensive posture, where I would be arguing that maybe
it could spread in six months but this was very, very improbable. Now, before I discuss the follow-plan at the end of the discussion, I say, “PSA screening has enabled us to detect prostate
cancer four to six years before it would have been diagnosed
clinically. Furthermore, in men with prostate cancer who were
never treated, changes in their prostate cancer, or progression,
occurred usually after 10 years. Therefore, it would even be
safe to see you again in five years; however, we will be aggressive about how closely we monitor you and plan to see you
back every six months.” Previously, six months seemed like
an eternity to patients. With the proper frame of reference,
which is derived from the natural history of prostate cancer
progression, six months now is understood to be a short time
between follow-ups.13

Whether you are negotiating a business deal, in armed conflict, or in
the doctor’s office, the reference point that is in the mind of the recipient can determine whether your proposal will be perceived as balanced
or one-sided, generous or unfair, comforting or anxiety-provoking. It is
important for negotiators to ensure that the other party is evaluating the
substance of what is being offered within an appropriate context. There is
always a context in which the proposal will be evaluated—there is always


36

PART I: THE POWER OF FRAMING

a reference point. As with defaults, it is worth asking whether a preexisting
reference point is appropriate or useful, or whether it needs to be reset.
Establish a proper reference point. Even generous
proposals can be evaluated negatively if the other side’s
reference point is not set appropriately.

4: DON’T APOLOGIZE FOR YOUR OFFER
It does a doctor little good if she gives the best advice possible, but then
undermines it by seeming apologetic for having proposed something the
patient does not like. The same is true in negotiations of all types. For
example, I’ve worked with a number of companies that have innovative
products and services, and in many cases, this puts their price point as
much as ten times higher than that of their competitors. Inevitably, when
the salesperson first mentions a high price, the customer’s reaction is
some mix of surprise, disappointment, and annoyance. “No one pays that
much for this type of thing.” At this point, the worst mistake a salesperson
can make is to appear apologetic for the high price point. Yet salespeople
do this often, perhaps because they are unprepared for the pushback and
are put on the defensive, or perhaps because they are trying to appear
sympathetic. There are many words and deeds that convey an apology:
responding with, “I know it’s a high price, but . . .”; too quickly expressing a willingness to negotiate price if necessary; getting derailed from the
initial pitch surrounding the value proposition; getting into a discussion
about what others are charging; or simply losing confidence in tone. So
what should a salesperson do instead?
In sales and in negotiations of all sorts, if you’ve crafted your proposal
carefully and think it is appropriate, don’t apologize for it. The moment
you seem apologetic, you give the other side the license to start haggling.
This does not mean you should be unwilling to negotiate price. Nor does
it mean you shouldn’t explain your price. But when you apologize for
your offer, you are creating a frame that says your proposal is inappropriate and that even you do not think it is a reasonable starting point. If you
are bringing more to the table than competing offers, you want to shift


Chapter 3: The Logic of Appropriateness

37

the frame to a discussion of value. For example, if the customer complains
about the price being too high, the salesperson might say, “I think what
you’re wondering is, how is it that despite having this price we have so
many people lining up to buy our product? What kind of value are we
delivering that allows us to win so many deals over our competitors? I’m
happy to have that conversation. At the end of the day, we both know that
nobody will ever pay more than something is worth. So let’s discuss the
value proposition . . .”
Always justify your offer, but don’t apologize for it.
As a final point regarding the tools for boosting appropriateness, it
is worth considering the ethics of framing. Dr. Ehdaie’s objectives were
clearly benevolent. In other contexts, however, we must consider when
framing is appropriate and when it might be unscrupulous. Any time you
are helping to shape the choice someone else makes, it is essential to evaluate not only your own intentions but also all of the consequences that will
follow. In the examples so far, we have tried to focus on negotiators who
have used framing tactics to help all of the parties overcome deadlock and
achieve value-creating outcomes.
This does not mean that these principles cannot be applied in nefarious ways—either due to ill intentions or because of the failure to consider how others will be affected. (We will consider such a situation later
in this section.) The good news is that it is not so easy to persuade people
to choose a course of action that is bad for them simply via framing. In the
vast majority of cases, and as evidenced throughout the examples we have
considered, framing works best when the party you are targeting is willing, and perhaps even hoping, to move in the direction you are steering
them—if only you can make it easy for them.
On the other hand, it is not always the case that the other side is willing to accommodate your substantive demands as long as you can accommodate them on style and structure. In some cases, unfortunately, both
sides have strongly held views or severe constraints, and neither side can
afford to accept the other’s position. How might the power of framing
help then? We consider this in the next chapter.


4

STRATEGIC AMBIGUITY
US–India Civil Nuclear Agreement

I

n 1968, the “tre at y on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear
Weapons,” more commonly known as the Non-Proliferation Treaty
(NPT), was negotiated into existence. The NPT was designed to restrict
the number of countries that would have access to nuclear weapons to
the five countries that had them at the time: the United States, the United
Kingdom, the Soviet Union, France, and China. Not coincidentally, these
were also the five permanent members of the United Nations Security
Council. The long-term vision of the NPT was that signatories would
commit (a) not to engage in proliferation activities, (b) to eventual
disarmament among those who currently had nuclear weapons, (c) to
supporting the peaceful use of nuclear technology for all signatories, and
(d) to submit to inspections and safeguards by the International Atomic
Energy Agency (IAEA) to ensure safety and compliance.
By the turn of the century, 190 countries had signed the NPT, with
the only holdouts at the time being North Korea, Israel, Pakistan, and
India.1 Those who refused to sign argued, as did many signatories, that
given insufficient commitment to disarmament by the nuclear haves, the
treaty was simply suppressing the sovereign and strategic rights of nuclear
have-nots. In the years since the NPT went into effect, each of these four
nonsignatories had, with varying degrees of success, developed its own
nuclear weapons.
In July 2005, the United States and India set in motion what would
become a three-year marathon of interrelated negotiations aimed at completing a “civilian nuclear agreement” between the two countries.2 The
premise was relatively straightforward: India would agree to separate its
military and civilian nuclear facilities and place the latter under IAEA
38


Chapter 4: Strategic Ambiguity

39

safeguards in exchange for full civil (i.e., nonmilitary) nuclear cooperation (e.g., commerce) by the United States and the then-45-nation
Nuclear Suppliers Group (NSG). India’s status as a nonsignatory to the
NPT, however, made the negotiations difficult—some would have said
inconceivable. To allow India to engage in civil nuclear commerce would,
in the view of many, undermine American commitment to the NPT. If
nonsignatories would be treated as well as signatories, what incentive
would there be for anyone to sign? In contrast, the Bush administration
and others among the NSG believed that despite being a nonsignatory
of the NPT, and despite having developed its own weapons, India had
not engaged in proliferation activities. Allowing it to participate in civilian nuclear commerce in exchange for some degree of IAEA inspections
and safeguards would only promote continued responsible behavior and
greater safety.
Reaching such an agreement was meant to be difficult. Negotiations
would need to be coordinated and sequenced at many levels, across the
globe. First, the United States would have to pass domestic legislation
allowing it to engage with a nonsignatory of the NPT (accomplished
via the Hyde Act in 2006). Then, the United States and India would
have to negotiate a bilateral agreement (referred to as a 123 Agreement).
Meanwhile, the IAEA would have to approve an agreement with India to
place Indian civil nuclear facilities under IAEA safeguards, and the NSG
would have to grant India an unprecedented waiver to allow it to have
access to nuclear technology and fuel. Finally, the agreement between US
and Indian diplomats would have to be approved by the US Congress and
supported by India’s Parliament.
One of the more vexing problems that arose during these negotiations
pertained to the consequences that would follow if India tested another
nuclear weapon. In 1998, India had, to broad international condemnation, conducted five nuclear tests, resulting not only in sanctions by the
United States and others, but also in retaliatory nuclear tests (for the first
time) by Pakistan, a mere two weeks later. A year later, in 1999, due to
Pakistani military incursions through the “Line of Control” separating
India and Pakistan in Kashmir, the two had waged history’s first and only
conventional war between known nuclear powers. With this terrifying


40

PART I: THE POWER OF FRAMING

backdrop in place, it is no surprise that support for the civil nuclear agreement among US lawmakers and many NSG nations was contingent upon
guarantees that India would not test another nuclear weapon.3
Meanwhile, support in India was contingent upon exactly the opposite.
There seemed no possibility that India’s Parliament would approve a deal
if the agreement limited their perceived sovereign right to test nuclear
weapons if and when they felt it was necessary. Indeed, this was the very
reason India had not signed the NPT in the first place: a civil nuclear
agreement that imposed NPT-type restrictions was entirely unacceptable. India had announced a voluntary moratorium on testing but was
unwilling to make the moratorium binding.
How do you negotiate an agreement when the exact same issue is a
deal breaker for both sides? How can you reconcile the interests of both
parties when the minimum requirements of one (based on the logic of
international security) are entirely unacceptable to the other (based on the
logic of national sovereignty)?

WITHOUT MONEY OR MUSCLE
In 2007, the United States and India negotiated their bilateral agreement;
in 2008, the government of Prime Minister Singh survived a no-confidence
vote in the Indian Parliament, the IAEA approved the safeguard agreement,
and the 45-nation NSG granted its waiver. Later that same year, the US
Congress approved the deal, and the two countries officially signed it on
October 10, 2008.
How did this happen? Which side subordinated its demands and
accepted the other side’s logic? Who made the courageous concession?
It turns out no one did.
So did the 123 Agreement signed by the United States and India
restrict nuclear tests? Did it stipulate the termination of nuclear commerce if India detonated a nuclear device? No one could say for sure.
On October 1, 2008, US Secretary of State Condoleezza Rice gave
testimony to the Senate in which she declared, “Let me reassure you that
an Indian test, as I have testified publicly, would result in most serious


Chapter 4: Strategic Ambiguity

41

consequences. Existing US law would require automatic cutoff of cooperation, as well as a number of other sanctions, if India were to test.”4
On the other side, on October 3, 2008, Indian External Affairs Minister
Pranab Mukherjee, when asked whether India had sacrificed the right to
test, clarified that “we would not like to convert this voluntary moratorium into a treaty-bound obligation. That position has been maintained.”5
What is going on? What does the agreement actually say? If anyone
ought to know, it would be Secretary Rice and Minister Mukherjee, the
two people who signed the final agreement on October 10, 2008. The fact
is that the 123 Agreement, and the network of agreements on which the
US–India deal is structured, are deliberately vague. But the lack of precision is by design: this is the art of strategic ambiguity.
STRATEGIC AMBIGUITY
Strategic ambiguity is a risky tactic that can pay dividends when used at
the appropriate time in the appropriate way. It is risky because it creates
an agreement that can be interpreted differently by different parties—we
will revisit this problem shortly. But multiple interpretations can also
be valuable. This is because sometimes the problem isn’t that the two
sides cannot live with each other’s demands, but that writing down or
announcing explicitly what you’re willing to live with is too problematic.
In this case, negotiators in the United States and India understood that
any agreement, no matter what language was used to write it down, would
involve both sides knowing that if India tested another weapon, which of
course it could technically do, the United States would be forced to terminate the agreement due to domestic and international pressure. It really
did not matter what was or was not in the signed agreement. The practical reality was that there was no way to stop India from testing a nuclear
weapon if it wished, and there was no way to stop the United States from
pulling out of the agreement if India tested. Knowing this would be the
American reaction was the best incentive for India not to test a weapon
in the first place. In other words, incentives were aligned and everyone
in the room agreed on everything—there was no misunderstanding. Yet,
putting the deal in writing would be problematic. For weeks negotiators


42

PART I: THE POWER OF FRAMING

labored over how to draft language that would be acceptable to each
side given its constraints. Any language akin to “if India tests a nuclear
weapon . . .” was a nonstarter in India; the absence of such language was
unacceptable in the United States. The eventual solution was an approach
that runs contrary to the instincts of most lawyers: the agreement had
to be sufficiently imprecise, allowing each side to interpret the agreement
and present it to its constituency in the most favorable way.
When neither side is willing to openly subordinate
its demands on key issues or principles, strategic
ambiguity—language that is deliberately open to
multiple interpretations—can help the parties reach
an agreement.

AMBIGUITY IS DANGEROUS IF THERE ARE
NO INCENTIVES FOR APPROPRIATE BEHAVIOR
To appreciate the role of strategic ambiguity in the negotiator’s tool kit—
and to help draw some clear boundaries on when it is advisable—we need
to first distinguish between different kinds of strategic relationships. There
are those in which one or both parties have the incentive and ability to
exploit the other—and will do so—unless a contract or treaty makes this
impossible or extremely costly. In such a case, it is wise to have an agreement
that clearly delineates the rights and responsibilities of each side and clarifies what behaviors are proscribed. Strategic ambiguity should be avoided
in these instances. In contrast, there are relationships in which mutual
interests are aligned enough so that the relationship is self-sustaining
regardless of what you write down. Here, you have the flexibility to keep the
contract incomplete or ambiguous if doing so helps you solve other problems (e.g., optics). In other words, strategic ambiguity should be limited
to situations where other mechanisms are in place to enforce appropriate
behavior from each party. India’s External Minister Pranab Mukherjee
made it quite clear that the nuclear negotiations fit this criterion—that is,
that the deal was inherently self-enforcing based on each side’s rights and
interests—when he said, days before the signing of the agreement: “We


Chapter 4: Strategic Ambiguity

43

have the right to test; others have a right to react.”6 This is not the kind
of language that could go into the agreement but was perhaps suitable for
a domestic audience. More generally, when the shadow of the audience
looms large, people are sometimes willing to accept certain de facto limitations being imposed on them in a strategic relationship, but are unwilling
to acknowledge or substantiate these in writing.
Strategic ambiguity should be used only when other
mechanisms are in place to ensure compliance with
appropriate behavior.

THE ROLE OF STRATEGIC AMBIGUITY IN EARLY RELATIONSHIPS
Strategic ambiguity can also be useful, ironically, when there is too little
trust at the outset for the parties to reach a comprehensive agreement.
Instead, parties may reach an initial deal that is incomplete or ambiguous, but which helps them stay engaged until trust is built. For example,
in cross-cultural deal making, if a party fears that tying their hands with
a long-term relationship is too risky, given the lack of a partner’s prior
track record, they will avoid signing a deal that is too committal. But
being explicitly noncommittal may also muddy the waters. For instance,
consider a situation in which Company X is sourcing from a new manufacturer, Company Y, but is unwilling to commit to a multiyear contract
or make any other commitments to offset Company Y’s investment in
the deal. Company Y can live with the reality that, at the end of the day,
if Y does not deliver a great product, X will look elsewhere. And yet, an
agreement that is explicitly noncommittal, with numerous provisions
that delineate all of the ways in which X is not responsible for the fate of Y,
could send a very negative signal or force the parties to confront and get
caught up haggling on issues that cannot be easily resolved. Introducing
some degree of ambiguity regarding the nature of the relationship and
the strength and length of commitment can provide both parties with the
flexibility and freedom they need to overcome initial hesitations and pursue early-stage collaboration with the comfort of “no strings attached.”
Even when both sides will benefit from behaving appropriately, some


44

PART I: THE POWER OF FRAMING

arrangements remain easy to understand and agree to in principle, but
are difficult to write down with precision, especially at the outset of what
might be a long-term, evolving relationship.
Strategic ambiguity can help parties initiate relationships when there is insufficient trust for full commitment,
but where being explicitly noncommittal is unacceptable.
It is worth highlighting that in each of the situations we’ve considered,
strategic ambiguity is not meant to substitute for a genuine and durable
understanding between the two sides. If there are deep divisions on key
issues of substance, strategic ambiguity not only will fail to help but may
make matters worse. This is the topic we now visit in more detail, as we
consider the potential misuse of framing to resolve conflict.


5

THE LIMITS OF FRAMING
Charting a Path to War in Iraq

I

n 2 0 0 2 , t he u s government, under President George W. Bush,
was pushing for a United Nations Security Council Resolution that
would put the Iraqi government, under Saddam Hussein, in material
breach of previous resolutions pertaining to, among other issues, Iraq’s
weapons of mass destruction (WMD) program. All parties agreed
that weapons inspectors would go to Iraq to assess whether Iraq was now
complying with UN demands. A strong disagreement surfaced when it
came to next steps. The United States, along with the United Kingdom
and others, demanded that a United Nations “authorization of force”
against Iraq be automatically triggered in the event that Iraq failed to
quickly satisfy inspectors. France, along with Germany, Russia, and
others (including the inspectors themselves), wanted to give the inspectors more time and—crucially—did not want an automatic trigger for
the use of force.1 Instead, they demanded that the parties agree to meet
again if the authorization of force seemed necessary. From the French
coalition perspective, an automatic trigger almost guaranteed war even
if there were no WMD program in place. The thinking was: How was
Iraq to “immediately, unconditionally, and actively” prove the nonexistence of something that others believed the Iraqis were good at hiding
and likely to lie about?
At the heart of the negotiation, then, was disagreement over a substantive issue (the trigger) that necessitated some type of compromise.
More importantly, there was a deeper underlying dispute regarding the
conditions under which the use of force would be appropriate.

45


46

PART I: THE POWER OF FRAMING

A CAUTIONARY TALE
Rather than resolving this core dispute, the parties opted for a strategically ambiguous solution: UN Security Council Resolution 1441 did not
contain any automatic triggers per se, but its language would allow the
United States and its coalition partners to later interpret it as being sufficient to authorize the use of force.2 For example, while making it clear that
further deliberation would precede military action, it also stated that Iraq
was being given “a final opportunity to comply with its disarmament obligations.” Moreover, as the US Ambassador to the UN, John Negroponte,
pointed out soon after Resolution 1441 was adopted, the trigger was not
the only thing the resolution did not contain:
If the Security Council fails to act decisively in the event of
further Iraqi violations, this resolution does not constrain any
Member State from acting to defend itself against the threat
posed by Iraq or to enforce relevant United Nations resolutions and protect world peace and security.3

As long as both coalitions were on the same page regarding their
assessments of Iraq’s compliance with this resolution, there would be
no problem: both sides could look forward to a second vote to authorize force if and when needed. Unfortunately, it was not long before
the two coalitions disagreed about the extent of Iraq’s compliance, and
whether and how soon the use-of-force vote should be taken. Given the
unresolved underlying dispute on this core issue, it became clear that the
French and the Russians were not in favor of quickly resorting to force
and would veto any such authorization. Meanwhile, for the Bush administration in the United States, which continued to favor the use of force, a
failed authorization vote would be worse than no vote at all.
And so it transpired that, without a second vote on the use of force,
against the strenuous objections of the French-led coalition, and even in
the absence of any trigger for the use of force in the resolution, the US-led
coalition went to war against Iraq on March 20, 2003. And both sides—
the French and the United States—argued that they were acting in accordance with Resolution 1441. The failure of this approach to deal making
can be seen not only in terms of the failure to prevent war, but because


Chapter 5: The Limits of Framing

47

it led to even greater divisions and mistrust in the UN Security Council
and beyond. Even if war was inevitable (for example, if the United States
was committed to this course of action), the use of strategic ambiguity to
gloss over deep divisions did not help and actually made matters worse.
AMBIGUITY IS NOT A REMEDY FOR SUBSTANTIVE CONFLICT
Ideally, ambiguity should be employed only if it helps to reach a deal that
all sides understand and accept substantively, but which they are having
difficulty writing down explicitly, due to the burden that is sometimes
imposed by excessive precision. Unfortunately, even when there is no
underlying agreement on substance, parties sometimes opt for strategic
ambiguity simply because it is a convenient way to overcome a deadlock,
or because it allows them to reach “some sort of agreement” rather than
no deal. This is problematic because it only postpones the substantive
conflict by sweeping it under the rug while creating a false belief that a
worthwhile deal has been reached. When the conflict reemerges, it can
be even worse because of dashed expectations, perceptions of breach, and
the costly accumulation of psychological, political, or economic investments that parties have since made on the basis of their alleged agreement.
Ambiguity should not be used as a substitute for
genuine agreement on substance.

A TRADE-OFF BETWEEN CURRENT AND FUTURE CONFLICTS
Strategic ambiguity involves a trade-off between minimizing current conflict and minimizing future conflict. If you are trying to reduce the likelihood of a dispute arising in the future, strategic ambiguity is not a good
idea. The agreement should be as explicit and unambiguous as possible to
avoid multiple interpretations of the deal as you go forward. If, however,
you are more concerned about how to resolve current deadlock so that
it does not obstruct deal making at the outset of the relationship, then
one solution is to use strategic ambiguity. From this perspective, strategic
ambiguity entails a bet—we accept a greater risk of future problems in


48

PART I: THE POWER OF FRAMING

exchange for making things easier for ourselves now. As we have seen,
deciding whether to take the bet requires careful consideration of the
costs and benefits, but a good rule is to lean away from strategic ambiguity when there are deep divisions on substantive issues that are unlikely to
go away (or are likely to get worse) with the passage of time.
Ambiguity involves a trade-off between solving current
conflicts and minimizing future conflicts.

BEWARE THE TEMPTATION TO SHAKE HANDS
WHEN THERE IS NO AGREEMENT
As the Resolution 1441 negotiation demonstrates, parties often embrace
strategic ambiguity with insufficient regard for the impact it can have on
future conflict. This may be due to strategic myopia—that is, insufficient
consideration of downstream consequences—but it can also result from
incentive systems. If negotiators are rewarded for reaching a deal or punished for failing to do so, they will find a way to reach an agreement, however flawed. These incentives may be explicit, as they are in the business
world, or implicit, as they might be in politics. When it is easier for the
audience (e.g., voters, top management, media) to judge whether a deal
was reached, and much harder to evaluate its long-term consequences,
negotiators are likely to favor strategies that defuse current conflicts, even
if doing so increases the likelihood or the magnitude of future conflicts.
If closing deals is rewarded, negotiators might conceal
substantive disagreements to push through flawed deals.

AMBIGUOUS AGREEMENTS MAY BE PARASITIC
In fairness, there is another—more cynical—way to assess what transpired between the United States and France in 2003. Consider what
would have happened if instead of a strategically ambiguous 1441, the
United States and the French had just agreed to reach no deal. In all likelihood, this would have meant that the United States would act without


Chapter 5: The Limits of Framing

49

UN authorization—that is, go to war against Iraq with a handful of coalition partners, which is what it did anyway. So why bother reaching a deal
at all? The reason for the deal may have been that both sides preferred
an ambiguous agreement that they knew would likely cause future conflict
over reaching no deal: the United States wanted to be able to claim UN
authorization even though few countries were ever going to join in the
attack, and the French wanted to avoid establishing precedents where
the Security Council is completely sidelined when UN members want
to go to war.
The cynical perspective suggests that, in fact, strategic ambiguity did
serve the interests of both sides in this case and there was no deep disagreement on substance—that is, the French and the United States knew
all along that the United States would act without broad UN support, but
both wanted to feed the illusion that the UN had not been abandoned.
This would give the United States some degree of legitimacy for its
actions, and give the French some degree of legitimacy for the UN.
If this view is accurate, then the failure here is not the inappropriate
use of strategic ambiguity from the point of view of the parties who were
present in the negotiation—each of them succeeded in achieving its
goals. The failure is at a system level, suggesting that sometimes, when
negotiators at the bargaining table find a way for each side to declare victory, it is not in the service of the greater good, but rather to achieve their
own narrow goals, perhaps at significant cost to other stakeholders. We
refer to such behavior—that is, action designed to benefit everyone in the
room at the expense of parties who are not at the table—as parasitic value
creation.4 The value captured by those at the bargaining table is “parasitic”
in that it does not result from synergies or mutual benefit created through
cooperation and trade; it comes out of the pockets of others.
Unfortunately, strategic ambiguity as a tool to “make everyone happy”
can be effective in the hands of people who are actually creating no value
in aggregate, but who will personally benefit from getting a deal done. The
lesson, then, is especially important for stakeholders who may be at the
receiving end of future negative consequences: beware of ambiguity or
incompleteness in agreements that are sold to you. If substantive disputes
will persist, or if costs will be incurred by other stakeholders—which you


50

PART I: THE POWER OF FRAMING

may need to work hard to discover if you were not privy to the discussions—you may want to demand greater clarity or precision in the deal,
or a more robust explanation for why it should be done.
Ambiguous or incomplete agreements might be
parasitic, meeting at-the-table interests at the expense
of other stakeholders.
Having reflected on potential problems with using strategic ambiguity
and, more generally, the considerations that should accompany any use of
framing to resolve conflicts, it is important to note that in most cases, the
use of framing helps overcome deadlocks without imposing the types of
negative consequences seen in this chapter. It is also worth remembering
that negotiation frames will always exist, regardless of whether someone
has tried to influence them. There is inevitably some default lens through
which proposals and options are being evaluated. The question is whether
and how a negotiator might reframe a situation to achieve better or fairer
outcomes for all parties—those who are at the table as well as others who
are affected by the negotiation.
We have discussed at great length how a proposal or outcome can be
framed. Let’s end this section by zooming out and discussing the frame
of the relationship itself. How parties perceive each other can have broad,
powerful, and long-lasting effects on negotiations. If you are mindful of
this, you will act early to create the right frame for the future relationship.


6

FIRST-MOVER ADVANTAGE
The Unbroken Peace Treaty

C

an you name this country? The longest standing treaty in United
States history is with this country. The first building on foreign soil
ever acquired by the United States is located there—and that building is
also the only place outside of the United States to have ever been designated a National Historic Landmark.1 This country has been a prominent
supporter of the United States in its “war” against terrorism, but military
cooperation between the two is not a recent development—soldiers
from this country fought alongside American forces in World War I,
and it emphatically sided with the United States in its fight against the
Confederate states during the American Civil War. Likewise, the United
States has long championed this country’s aspirations for noninterference
by foreign powers. It is also one of the 20 countries around the world with
which the United States of America has a Free Trade Agreement. Which
country is it?
Some more hints: It is in Africa. Approximately 99% of the population
is Arab or Berber, and 99% is Muslim. It is one of only two countries on
the continent that has been designated a “major non-NATO ally” of the
United States, affording it special military and financial cooperation. Any
other guesses?
Final hint: One of the greatest American films—with perhaps the
most highly acclaimed screenplay—is set in the largest city of this country. Who is this special friend to America?
Historians and movie buffs who have seen Casablanca might have
an advantage in identifying the African nation as being the Kingdom of
Morocco. The real question, however, is what accounts for this long-lasting
relationship?
51


52

PART I: THE POWER OF FRAMING

WITHOUT MONEY OR MUSCLE
In 1786, Thomas Jefferson and John Adams signed the “Moroccan–
American Treaty of Friendship” that had been negotiated between the
American representative, Thomas Barclay, and Mohammed III, Sultan of
Morocco.2 The treaty, written in Arabic and then translated into English,
had 25 articles, mostly pertaining to naval and commercial matters. The
final article set the length of the treaty obligations: “This Treaty shall continue in full Force, with the help of God for Fifty Years.” Almost 230 years
later, it is still in effect. The treaty’s preamble had been much more optimistic—and ultimately more accurate—when it stated that the agreement
was made (according to the Islamic calendar) “on the twenty-fifth day of
the blessed Month of Shaban, in the Year One thousand two hundred,
trusting in God it will remain permanent.”
But the signing of the Treaty of Friendship merely formalized a relationship that had already existed between the two countries for almost
a decade. The first, and most consequential, step towards friendship was
planted in 1777, when Morocco became the first sovereign country to recognize the independence of the fledgling United States of America. In
December of that year, seeing the value of enhanced commercial relationships with America, the sultan announced that the ports of his country
would be open to the United States. While it took a few years for the US
government to respond to this offer—they had more pressing concerns
during the war with England— it planted the seed that would grow into a
friendship and a commercial relationship for centuries.
FIRST-MOVER ADVANTAGE
As we have seen previously, there is a powerful first-mover advantage when
it comes to framing. The sooner a frame takes hold, the more likely it is to
stick and to shape subsequent negotiations. We saw this when discussing
default options: it pays to start with your initial template for the negotiations, or with your draft of the agreement. In the case of the longstanding relationship between the United States and Morocco, the friendship
frame was set early on, when there was no prior, dominant frame to
contest it. In business contexts, multiple frames are usually established


Chapter 6: First-Mover Advantage

53

very early in the deal-making process. These include, for example, who is
perceived as strong or weak, whether it makes sense to be transparent or
to be guarded, and which reference points or precedents are appropriate
when evaluating offers, valuations, and so on. Effective negotiators are
mindful of the influence such frames will have as the negotiation unfolds
and seek to establish the preferred frame as early as possible.
There is a powerful first-mover advantage in framing.
Whenever possible, seek to control the frame of the
negotiation at the start.

REFRAME AS EARLY AS POSSIBLE
Because you do not always get to set the initial frame, you might need to
act quickly to assess and change the frame as needed. Not so long ago, a
very successful interventional cardiologist I know was negotiating a contract renewal with his hospital. He knew the hospital CEO understood
the tremendous value he brought to the hospital and assumed this would
be a smooth process. To his surprise, the CEO of the hospital began the
negotiations with an aggressive opening offer that would lower his salary
by 20%. The CEO justified this using data and extensive documentation
that showed the hospital was losing money and that the doctor, too, was
operating at a loss. Conveniently, the CEO had included all manner of
hospital fixed costs in the calculations to make the case and had ignored
various other ways in which the doctor was contributing to the bottom
line and to other goals of the hospital system. Each time they met to discuss the situation, the conversation would get bogged down in intractable
arguments over what constituted fairness and the legitimacy of specific
line items in the CEO’s profit/loss analyses.
It became clear to the doctor that the only way to dislodge the dominant “We are losing money so it is only fair that you should be paid
less” framing would be to introduce an entirely different template as the
basis for discussion. Before the next meeting, the doctor asked the CEO
whether, given fairness was the concern, he would be open to an objective, third-party analysis of the fair market value of his contribution to the


54

PART I: THE POWER OF FRAMING

hospital. Many hospitals use comparative analyses in a region to decide
on physician salaries, and there are firms that provide such services. The
CEO agreed to this approach. When the data came in, it revealed, as the
doctor had expected, that he was currently underpaid given the revenue
he was generating for the hospital. Not only did this shift the conversation towards the appropriate increase in salary; also it gave the CEO the
justification he would need to approve a salary increase for the doctor.
If the existing frame is disadvantageous, seek to reframe
as soon as possible.

DISPUTES ARE EASIER TO PREEMPT THAN TO RESOLVE
One element that sets the Morocco example apart from earlier cases
we have examined is that the initiatives by the sultan were not aimed at
resolving an existing deadlock or dispute with the United States; rather,
he was engineering a path that might preempt future conflicts. Just as
early framing is more powerful than late framing, it is much easier to preempt a deadlock than it is to resolve one. This principle holds not only
when it comes to managing grand strategic initiatives, but also in dealing
with more parochial tactical issues.
Here is an amusing example that makes the point. At the Third
UN Conference on the Law of the Sea (1973–1982), Tommy Koh,
Singapore’s permanent representative to the United Nations, chaired one
of the key committees related to the contentious issue of deep seabed
mining. With delegates from over 150 nations at the table, Ambassador
Koh needed to find some way to reconcile the divergent interests and
perspectives of everyone in the room. Discussing every issue with such
a large group would have been impossible, so Koh needed some way to
shrink the group to a more manageable number. This would not be easy
to do if everyone felt that they had a right and reason to be there. Tommy
Koh reflected on this issue, years later:
In the case of the negotiation on the financial terms of mining
contracts, we began in a room of 150 countries, and it was
necessary to have meetings with 150 countries because you


Chapter 6: First-Mover Advantage

55

are indulging in public education . . . on what are the issues,
what are the parameters, what are the various scenarios, [and
to] explain to them all of the technical terms. . . . Once that’s
accomplished, you have to make a transition from this huge
plenary group to a smaller forum. . . . 3

But how do you exclude anyone, even when it is for the good of the
whole group? Here’s what Koh did:
So I invented a new group called the “Group of Financial
Experts,” and I picked a meeting room that could accommodate maximum 40 people. It was open-ended—nobody’s
name. Anybody could come. But just by calling it the Group of
Financial Experts was sort of intimidating. So a lot of my colleagues felt that they didn’t qualify to join this group. I didn’t
try to dissuade them [by telling them] that they did. And so
most people did not come. . . . And it gave us—in a smaller
forum—[the ability] to advance the collective knowledge
about the problem.

As we see in Koh’s approach, effective negotiators try to foresee deadlock and create conditions that will allow people to walk away from direct
confrontation without feeling that they are losing or conceding anything
of importance. It would have been much harder to ask people to leave
the room than it was to create a frame that dissuaded them from entering
in the first place. It is a reminder to not wait for conflict to erupt before
we start thinking about framing, optics, audience problems, and strategic
ambiguity. If the parties are on a collision course, it is better to help them
steer away from each other rather than to pick up the pieces afterwards.
A colleague and I recently discussed the following situation: a person
was to be selected to oversee a peace process between warring factions
within an ethnic group. We knew that the leader of one particular faction
would feel strongly that he should be chosen because, from his point of
view, he was the legitimate leader of the ethnic group and deserved to
hold this esteemed position. The problem was that not all of the warring
factions agreed, and this discrepancy was one of the key reasons for much
of the infighting. This leader was too powerful to rebuff and too controversial to include.


56

PART I: THE POWER OF FRAMING

From our point of view, we needed someone who could be trusted by
all of the parties. My suggestion was for us to reframe and redefine the
role of overseer so that it no longer represented prestige or status—and
to do so before discussing the role in any detail with the parties. If the
role were conceptualized as more bureaucratic and low-level, the leader
would be less likely to fight for it.
Disputes are easier to preempt than to resolve. Decisions
can sometimes be framed in ways that help people avoid
confrontation in the first place.

HIGH-LEVERAGE MOMENTS FOR FRAMING
Both the Morocco example and the Law of the Sea scenario serve to
highlight another commonly overlooked factor in negotiations: along
with the big issues and decisions that parties must often confront, there
are many less visible, less urgent, and seemingly simpler decisions that
can sometimes have a large effect on the outcome of the deal. In Koh’s
case, given the enormity of the overall negotiation, the decision to move
from a plenary group to a working group was not a particularly noteworthy moment. In the sultan’s case, there was no urgency in reaching out to
the United States, or in moving quickly to establish peaceable relations.
In both cases, however, potential conflict was preempted by small, early
actions that took place before there was a need to act.
This is not to suggest that one needs to worry about every small decision in a negotiation, but there are some small but consequential choices
in most negotiations that deal makers should take seriously. I think of
these as high-leverage moments in a negotiation—for relatively little effort,
they allow you to significantly impact the frame and, as a result, the likelihood of success. These high-leverage moments tend to emerge in the
early stage of the negotiation or relationship when the frame is still up for
grabs and every decision has the potential to be imbued with heightened
significance. This is powerfully demonstrated in an incident that dates
back to the start of US–Morocco relations.4 When Thomas Barclay was
negotiating the treaty with the Moroccans, the sultan raised the issue of


Chapter 6: First-Mover Advantage

57

a tribute—a gift—which he said he ought to receive to secure the deal
between the two countries. Barclay responded that the only “tribute” he
could offer was a friendship with the United States on equal terms. If that
was unacceptable to the sultan, Barclay said, he would have to go back to
the United States without a treaty. In that small moment of high leverage,
the sultan conceded and agreed to a relationship based on equality. That
was a pretty smart move with a country that would go on to become the
world’s greatest superpower.
Early actions can take on heightened significance. Look
for low-cost opportunities to powerfully influence the
frame and to establish the appropriate expectations
and precedents for the relationship.

SUMMARY OF LESSONS FROM PART I: THE POWER OF FRAMING
• Control the frame of the negotiation.
• Make it easier for the other side to back down from strong positions.
• Wise concessions on style and structure can help avoid costly
concessions on substance.
• Pay attention to the optics: how will the deal look to the other side’s
audience?
• Help the other side sell the deal to their audience.
• Make it safe for the other side to ask for help on optics.
• Avoid one-issue negotiations: add issues or link separate one-issue
negotiations.
• Negotiate multiple issues simultaneously, not sequentially.
• Diffuse the spotlight so one issue does not become too prominent.
• If there is only one issue, try splitting it into two.
• Unmask the underlying interests: incompatible demands can hide
reconcilable interests.
• Be firm on substance, flexible on structure: I know where I need to
get, I’m flexible on how I get there.
• Getting unstuck is a worthy enough short-term goal.


58

PART I: THE POWER OF FRAMING

• Address the logic of appropriateness: what does a person like me do
in a situation like this?
• Leverage social proof to boost appropriateness.
• Framing an option as unique is a double-edged sword.
• Frame your proposal as the default option.
• The party that drafts the initial version of the agreement or process
gains leverage.
• Establish a proper reference point for their evaluations.
• Always justify your offer, but don’t apologize for it.
• Strategic ambiguity can help resolve deadlock when no one can
back down.
• Strategic ambiguity should be used only if other mechanisms are in
place to ensure compliance.
• Strategic ambiguity can help overcome initial hesitations to starting
relationships.
• Ambiguity is not a remedy for substantive conflict.
• Ambiguity involves a trade-off between current conflicts and future
conflicts.
• If closing deals is rewarded, negotiators might conceal substantive
disagreements to push through flawed deals.
• Ambiguous deals may be parasitic, hurting those who are not at the
table.
• Be the first mover: control the frame early.
• If the existing frame is disadvantageous, reframe as early as possible.
• Better to preempt conflict than to resolve it: frame decisions in ways
that help people avoid confrontation.
• Early in the relationship, find low-cost opportunities to create the
right frame for the relationship.


Part II

THE POWER OF PROCESS

The good news is, there is light at the
end of the tunnel. The bad news is,
there is no tunnel.
SHIMON PERES

59


7

THE POWER OF PROCESS
Negotiating the US Constitution

T

he war for american independence between the United
States and Great Britain lasted eight years, formally ending in the
Treaty of Paris, which was signed in 1783. By that time, the Articles of
Confederation had served as the governing document of the United
States for six years.1 By design, the Articles gave little power to the central government, and the sovereignty of the 13 states was paramount.
The Articles went so far as to clarify that the relationship between the
states was merely a “league of friendship with each other.” This was to
be expected given the confederation was formed by people who had just
freed themselves from the grip of power vested in a distant monarch. Soon
enough, however, problems with this arrangement emerged. George
Washington, commander in chief of the Continental Army, had seen the
failings firsthand during the war itself. Congress had no power to tax, and
the states were often unwilling to contribute the funds necessary to pay
military wages or the war debt owed to foreign countries. After the war
ended, matters worsened. Congress was considered so powerless that its
delegates often failed to even show up; on occasions when a quorum was
reached, little was accomplished. Even bills aimed at raising tax dollars
to pay the war debt were defeated, not because a majority of the states
dissented, but because the Articles gave every state a veto. In 1786, Rhode
Island defeated such a bill despite support in 12 other states; in 1787, New
York cast the deciding vote to do the same.
Evidence that the Articles had serious shortcomings mounted. In 1787,
the highly publicized but short-lived Shays’ Rebellion, an uprising among
Massachusetts farmers who had economic grievances, made the economic

60


Chapter 7: The Power of Process

61

and political problems plaguing the young nation especially vivid. Soon
after, the various states agreed to send delegates to the Constitutional
Convention in Philadelphia. The goal of the convention was explicitly
modest: to consider modifications to the Articles of Confederation. Had
the convention been seen as an event at which reformers would try to
completely overhaul the government and wrest power away from the
states, it is unlikely that any state would have even sent delegates. Yet,
that is precisely what occurred.
Although it is certainly possible to overstate the role any one person
plays at historic events, James Madison is quite rightly considered to
have been one of the few indispensable characters in Philadelphia that
summer. Yet, by almost any measure, the deck was stacked against him.
At 5 feet 4 inches, and weighing close to 100 pounds, Madison did not
project strength or stature. Far from being a captivating orator, he was
shy and sometimes spoke too quietly in the debates to be properly heard.
At 36 years of age, he was neither a war hero, nor a prominent national
figure, nor even a senior member of the delegation from his home state of
Virginia. Most problematic, there was very little support for a significant
overhaul among the American population at large, and the notion that
state legislatures would accept any sizable reduction in their powers was
almost unthinkable. Nonetheless, in large part due to Madison’s efforts,
when the convention ended, the delegates had drafted an entirely new
constitution that shifted considerable power towards a new central government. By late 1788, the required supermajority of states (nine of 13)
had ratified it, and by early 1789, the US Constitution became the law of
the land. How did this happen?

NEGOTIATING THE IMPOSSIBLE
For his contributions, Madison would come to be known as the “Father of
the Constitution.” And while he spoke over 200 times during the debates
that took place in the summer of 1787, much of what he managed to
accomplish might be attributed to what took place before most other delegates even arrived in Philadelphia. By the time the convention started,
Madison had already shaped the deliberations that would take place.2


62

PART II: THE POWER OF PROCESS

Madison arrived in Philadelphia on May 3, 1787, 11 days before
the Constitutional Convention was scheduled to start. True to character, he was the first delegate to show up. George Washington, a fellow
Virginian—and the most popular man on the continent—would be the
second to arrive ten days later. When Madison and Washington visited
the convention hall on May 14 for the scheduled commencement of the
now-historic deliberations, they discovered that apart from some local
Pennsylvanians, they were the only two people from among the other
12 states to have made it to Philadelphia. While justifiably concerned by
what the delay portended, Madison got straight to work. The task ahead,
as Madison saw it, was to convince the other delegates that the Articles of
Confederation needed to be thrown out completely. To be more precise,
given the potentially fatal shortcomings of a system in which any one state
could overrule all others on matters of national importance, the new system needed to vest significantly greater power in a national government.
Madison understood that the greatest barrier to the drastic change
he wanted was the default process that was in place: the Articles of
Confederation were going to be the starting point of any conversation. As
long as the Articles served as the template to be revised, they would be too
powerful an anchor in every discussion of how to structure government
appropriately. A process based on, “How should we revise the Articles?”
could never lead to as much change as a process based on, “What is the
best system of government?” The process would need to be changed.
Madison, working with George Washington and other like-minded
delegates from Pennsylvania and Virginia, started to draft an alternative
document that could serve as the starting point for discussion. What
came to be known as the “Virginia Plan” consisted of 15 resolutions that,
although presented as revisions to the Articles, in fact upended the existing compact between the states. Among its proposals were the idea of
proportional representation in Congress, giving power to citizens rather
than state legislatures; the veto power of the executive branch; elements
of checks and balances; and the ability of the legislative branch to negate
state laws that were incompatible with the national interest. Perhaps most
astutely, anticipating the resistance of state legislatures to the changes,
it also proposed a revised process for ratifying the new Constitution: it


Chapter 7: The Power of Process

63

called for ratification not by state legislatures, but by assemblies specifically selected for this purpose by the people of the various states.3
Not even the considerable talent gathered in Philadelphia in May 1787
could have created such a document without the exhaustive preparation
Madison had undertaken before setting foot in Philadelphia. One month
earlier, in April 1787, after countless weeks of careful and extensive
research on the history of different forms of government dating at least as
far back as ancient Greece, Madison had drafted a document titled “Vices
of the Political System of the United States.” In it, he laid out a careful critique of the existing system, as well as ideas on how the problems could
be addressed. Shared with the Virginia and Philadelphia delegates in May,
this treatise served not only as the backbone of the Virginia Plan but also
as the basis for reformation presented at the Constitutional Convention.
The convention finally started on May 25. Only four days later, Virginia
Governor Edmund Randolph presented the Virginia Plan. Reactions
ranged from enthusiastic support to shock and anger. But the die was
cast, and all of the debates to follow would take place in the shadow of
the Virginia Plan. There was now an entirely new process in place; instead
of debating the legitimacy of revisions to the Articles, arguments were
focused on supporting or opposing elements of the Virginia Plan. Many
compromises were made by all sides in the months ahead, but as each day
progressed, the Articles of Confederation were left further behind.
HAVE A PROCESS STRATEGY
What truly exemplifies Madison’s genius is not merely the extent of his
preparedness, but the focus of it. Whereas most people know to prepare for the substantive discussions that will eventually occur, Madison
understood the power of shaping the process that will ultimately determine
whether, when, and how the substantive discussions will take place. The
most obvious examples were Madison’s extensive efforts in resetting the
starting point of discussions and the coalition-building he did before the
convention even started. If he had not executed these process interventions, the negotiations might well have gone a different way. Another crucial process element that favored Madison was the gag rule that delegates


64

PART II: THE POWER OF PROCESS

instituted to shield their debates from public interference; if too much
information on the ongoing negotiations had leaked early on, it would
have been difficult for some delegates to continue the controversial work
of the convention. If these process elements had not been carefully considered and shaped, the debates would have started—and likely ended—
quite differently.
The substance of a negotiation is about what the parties are trying to
achieve. Process is about how they will get from where they are today to
where they want to be. In the previous section, I discussed the peril of
focusing exclusively on substance and ignoring the frame. In this section,
I will make the same argument regarding process: even the most brilliant
strategy for the substance of negotiations can be undermined if there is
insufficient attention to process. Here are just a few elements of process to
consider and try to shape:
• How long will negotiations last?
• Who will be involved and in what capacity?
• What will be on the agenda, and in what order will
issues be discussed?
• Who will draft the initial proposal?
• Will negotiations be public or private?
• When and how will progress be reported outside of
negotiations?
• Given multiple parties or issues, will there be one
negotiation track or many?
• Will all the parties be in the same room at the same time?
• Will negotiations take place face-to-face or via
technology?
• How many meetings will be scheduled?
• How will major deadlocks or other problems be
managed?
• Will there be outside observers or mediators?


Chapter 7: The Power of Process

65

• Will deadlines, if any, be binding or not?
• What milestones might help build momentum and keep
the process on track?
• If the negotiations end in no deal, when and how might
parties reengage?
• Who are the parties that need to ratify the deal, and how
much support is sufficient for passage?
In most negotiations, some or many of these factors will be predetermined, or there may be a default process in place due to precedent or the
actions of other parties. But as we have seen, defaults need not be blindly
accepted—they can be reset to great advantage. This happens only when
negotiators have evaluated all of the important elements of process in
advance and have assessed how alternative processes might facilitate or
hinder progress.
Have a process strategy: how will you get from where
you are today to where you want to be? Consider
the factors that influence whether, when, and how
substantive negotiations will occur.

DON’T IGNORE THE IMPLEMENTATION PROCESS
In the case of the United States Constitution, the crucial role of process
can be seen even after the close of the convention. Much of the success
in achieving ratification by the states can be attributed to the type of process that was implemented. Recall that many state governments would
not have been in favor of the kinds of changes the new Constitution
proposed. Moreover, many detractors of the Constitution were going
to argue that delegates at the Constitutional Convention had exceeded
their authority, that there was going to be too much power vested in the
national government, and that individual rights were not sufficiently protected (a concern that was later remedied by the Bill of Rights).
How do you get sufficient support for a deal that is certain to shock
many of those who have been outside of the negotiation? Fortunately


66

PART II: THE POWER OF PROCESS

for Madison and other supporters of the Constitution (dubbed the
Federalists), the process for ratification was tailor-made to help them
overcome opposition by the Anti-Federalists. First, and most crucially,
according to Article VII of the Constitution, only nine of the 13 states
needed to ratify the Constitution for it to go into effect for those states.
This was despite the fact that any previous revision to the Articles of
Confederation, which is what the new Constitution was supposed to
be, had required a unanimous vote by all 13 states. Second, ratification
took place through specially called state ratification conventions, rather
than by the sitting state legislatures. Third, delegates were empowered
to make only one choice—vote yes or no—and could not propose
amendments or negotiate for revisions. And fourth, the Federalists
moved quickly and strategically to schedule early votes designed to win
passage in five of the pro-Constitution states. This made it easier for
delegates in other states who might have been on the fence to feel more
comfortable voting in favor. Certainly, substantive concessions were
also made to shore up support in some states—most notably, reaching
an understanding that the Bill of Rights would be taken up by the first
Congress under the new Constitution. But it is hard to imagine how the
Federalists could have achieved success without the right process elements in place. If ratification had required consensus, states like Rhode
Island, which had not even sent delegates to the Convention, would
have surely vetoed all efforts from the start. Had states been allowed to
vote on different versions of the Constitution, or to reopen debates in
the hopes of scoring concessions, deadlock would have almost certainly
resulted. Likewise, had the Anti-Federalists been given more time to
mount an organized challenge to the Constitution, things might have
ended differently.
A process strategy for deal making is not enough—you
also have to strategize the implementation process.
What will be required for successful implementation?
How will you garner sufficient support for the deal?
How will you ensure ratification?
